Message of the Constitutional President of the United Mexican States, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, at the Leaders Summit on Climate Change
Presidencia de la República
22 de abril de 2021
---
???
Presidencia de la República  | 22 de abril de 2021
I will begin by explaining that, although we have discovered three large oil deposits, the oil we are discovering will basically be used to meet the domestic demand for fuel, and the practice of exporting crude oil and buying gasoline will end. In this way, we will help avoid the excessive use of fossil fuels.
We are also modernizing our hydroelectric power plants to reduce the use of fuel oil or coal in the production of electricity.
Energy produced with water is clean and cheap. Therefore, we have decided to replace old turbines with modern equipment, which will allow us to use water from reservoirs to produce more energy without building new dams and without causing damage.
The third proposal consists of sharing with you—especially you, President Biden—a successful experience. We are carrying out the Sowing Life program, which is possibly the largest reforestation effort in the world. Four hundred and fifty thousand farmers are receiving a salary of five thousand pesos a month to plant fruit and timber trees on their lands or plots.
So far, 700 million of one billion have been planted on one million hectares. The budget totals 29 billion pesos a year, or 1.4 billion dollars.
The proposal is that, together, we expand this program in southeastern Mexico and in Central America to plant three billion additional trees and create 1.2 million jobs.
We will cover our financial responsibility and commit ourselves to help with the productive and social organization, and you, President Biden, could finance the Sowing Life program in Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador.
We should bear in mind that four million hectares of trees absorb 70 million tons of carbon dioxide a year.
I will add a complementary proposal, with all due respect. The United States government could offer all who participate in this program and sow trees on their land for three consecutive years, the possibility of obtaining a temporary work visa, and after another three or four years, they could even obtain residency in the United States, or dual citizenship.
Migration, as we all know, is not resolved with coercive measures, but rather with justice and well-being. In addition, you, President Biden, are a sensitive man and you know that the migrant's desire to work and get ahead is key to the development of nations. Great nations have been made with migrants, with these exceptional beings.  It's a matter of organizing the flow of migrants and channeling them humanely and with practical judgment.
In addition to a love of nature and the responsibility to leave the legacy of a habitable planet to the new generations, universal brotherhood must also prevail.
Thank you.
National Palace, April 22, 2021
